.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii limnoria.1
.\"
.TH LIMNORIA 1 "JULY 2009"
.SH NAME
limnoria - A robust and user friendly Python IRC bot
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B limnoria
.RI [ options ] " configFile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Limnoria
is a robust, user-friendly, and programmer-friendly Python IRC bot.
It aims to be an adequate replacement for most existing IRC bots.  It
includes a very flexible and powerful ACL system for controlling access
to commands, as well as more than 50 builtin plugins providing around
400 actual commands.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\^\-version
Show version of program.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\^\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\^\-profile
Enable profiling.
.TP
.BI \-n " NICK" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-nick=" NICK
Nick the bot should use.
.TP
.BI \-u " USER" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-user=" USER
Full username the bot should use.
.TP
.BI \-i " IDENT" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-ident=" IDENT
Ident the bot should use.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\^\-daemon
Determines whether the bot will daemonize.  This is a no-op on
non-POSIX systems.
.TP
.B \-\^\-allow\-default\-owner
Determines whether the bot will allow its defaultCapabilities not to
include "\-owner", thus giving all users the owner capability by
default.  This is dumb, hence we require a command-line option to
enable it.
.TP
.B \-\^\-allow\-root
Determines whether the bot will be allowed to run as root.  You do not
want this.  Do not do it.  Even if you think you want it, you do not.
.TP
.B \-\^\-debug
Determines whether some extra debugging stuff will be logged by this
script.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR python (1),
.IR limnoria-test (1),
.IR limnoria-botchk (1),
.IR limnoria-wizard (1),
.IR limnoria-adduser (1),
.IR limnoria-plugin-doc (1),
.IR limnoria-plugin-create (1)
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was originally written by James McCoy
<vega dot james at gmail dot com>.  Permission is granted to copy,
distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the Limnoria
license, a BSD-style license.
