.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"	transcript compatibility for postscript use.
.\"
.\"	synopsis:  .P! <file.ps>
.\"
.de P!
.fl
\!!1 setgray
.fl
\\&.\"
.fl
\!!0 setgray
.fl			\" force out current output buffer
\!!save /psv exch def currentpoint translate 0 0 moveto
\!!/showpage{}def
.fl			\" prolog
.sy sed \-e 's/^/!/' \\$1\" bring in postscript file
\!!psv restore
.
.de pF
.ie     \\*(f1 .ds f1 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f2 .ds f2 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f3 .ds f3 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f4 .ds f4 \\n(.f
.el .tm ? font overflow
.ft \\$1
..
.de fP
.ie     !\\*(f4 \{\
.	ft \\*(f4
.	ds f4\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f3 \{\
.	ft \\*(f3
.	ds f3\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f2 \{\
.	ft \\*(f2
.	ds f2\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f1 \{\
.	ft \\*(f1
.	ds f1\"
'	br \}
.el .tm ? font underflow
..
.ds f1\"
.ds f2\"
.ds f3\"
.ds f4\"
'\" t 
.ta 8n 16n 24n 32n 40n 48n 56n 64n 72n  
.TH "SUPYBOT" "1" 
.SH "NAME" 
supybot \(em A robust and user friendly Python IRC bot 
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBsupybot\fR [\fB\options\fP] \fIconfigFile\fR  
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
\fBsupybot\fR is a robust, user-friendly, 
and programmer-friendly Python IRC bot.  It aims to be an adequate 
replacement for most existing IRC bots.  It includes a very 
flexible and poerful ACL system for controlling access to 
commands, as well as more than 50 builtin plugins providing 
around 400 actual commands. 
 
.SH "OPTIONS" 
.PP 
These programs follow the usual GNU command line syntax, 
with long options starting with two dashes (`-').  A summary of 
options is included below. 
 
.IP "\fB\--version\fP" 10 
Show version of program. 
.IP "\fB\-h\fP           \fB\--help\fP         " 10 
Show summary of options. 
.IP "\fB\-P\fP           \fB\--profile\fP         " 10 
Enable profiling. 
.IP "\fB\-O\fP" 10 
Optimizes asserts out of the code; -O0 optimizes asserts 
and uses psyco. 
 
.IP "\fB\-nNICK\fP           \fB\--nick=NICK\fP         " 10 
Nick the bot should use. 
.IP "\fB\-uUSER\fP           \fB\--user=USER\fP         " 10 
Full username the bot should use. 
.IP "\fB\-iIDENT\fP           \fB\--ident=IDENT\fP         " 10 
Ident the bot should use.   
.IP "\fB\-d\fP           \fB\--daemon\fP         " 10 
Determines whether the bot will daemonize.  This is a 
no-op on non-POSIX systems. 
 
.IP "\fB\--allow-eval\fP" 10 
Determines whether the bot will allow the evaluation 
of arbitrary Python code. 
 
.IP "\fB\--allow-default-owner\fP" 10 
Determines whether the bot will allow its defaultCapabilities 
not to include "-owner", thus giving all users the owner capability 
by default.  This is dumb, hence we require a command-line option. 
 
.IP "\fB\--allow-root\fP" 10 
Determines whether the bot will be allowed to run as root.  You 
don't want this.  Don't do it.  Even if you think you want it, you don't. 
 
.IP "\fB\--debug\fP" 10 
Determines whether some extra debugging stuff will be logged by 
this script. 
 
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.PP 
python (1), supybot-wizard (1), supybot-adduser (1), 
supybot-newplugin (1). 
.SH "AUTHOR" 
.PP 
This manual page was originally written by Jonathan Hseu vomjom@debian.org for 
the \fBDebian\fP system (but may be used by others).  Permission is 
granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under 
the terms of the Supybot license, a BSD-style license.  
 
.PP 
On Debian systems with Supybot installed, the complete text 
of the Supybot license can be found in /usr/share/doc/supybot/LICENSE 
 
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Mon 13 Sep 2004, 13:44 
