.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"	transcript compatibility for postscript use.
.\"
.\"	synopsis:  .P! <file.ps>
.\"
.de P!
.fl
\!!1 setgray
.fl
\\&.\"
.fl
\!!0 setgray
.fl			\" force out current output buffer
\!!save /psv exch def currentpoint translate 0 0 moveto
\!!/showpage{}def
.fl			\" prolog
.sy sed \-e 's/^/!/' \\$1\" bring in postscript file
\!!psv restore
.
.de pF
.ie     \\*(f1 .ds f1 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f2 .ds f2 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f3 .ds f3 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f4 .ds f4 \\n(.f
.el .tm ? font overflow
.ft \\$1
..
.de fP
.ie     !\\*(f4 \{\
.	ft \\*(f4
.	ds f4\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f3 \{\
.	ft \\*(f3
.	ds f3\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f2 \{\
.	ft \\*(f2
.	ds f2\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f1 \{\
.	ft \\*(f1
.	ds f1\"
'	br \}
.el .tm ? font underflow
..
.ds f1\"
.ds f2\"
.ds f3\"
.ds f4\"
'\" t 
.ta 8n 16n 24n 32n 40n 48n 56n 64n 72n  
.TH "SUPYBOT-WIZARD" "1" 
.SH "NAME" 
supybot-wizard \(em A wizard for creating configuration files 
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBsupybot-wizard\fR [\fB\options\fP]  
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
\fBsupybot-wizard\fR is an in-depth wizard that provides 
a nice user interface for creating configuration files for 
\fBsupybot\fR. 
.SH "OPTIONS" 
.PP 
These programs follow the usual GNU command line syntax, 
with long options starting with two dashes (`-').  A summary of 
options is included below. 
.IP "\fB\--version\fP         " 10 
Show version of program. 
.IP "\fB\-h\fP           \fB\--help\fP         " 10 
Show summary of options. 
.IP "\fB\--allow-root\fP" 10 
Determines whether the wizard will be allowed to run 
as root.  You don't want this.  Don't do it.  Even if you 
think you want it, you don't. 
 
.IP "\fB\--no-network\fP" 10 
Determines whether the wizard will be allowed to run 
without a network connection. 
 
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.PP 
python (1), supybot (1), supybot-adduser (1), 
supybot-newplugin (1). 
.SH "AUTHOR" 
.PP 
This manual page was originally written by Jonathan Hseu vomjom@debian.org for 
the \fBDebian\fP system (but may be used by others).  Permission is 
granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under 
the terms of the Supybot license, a BSD-style license.  
 
.PP 
On Debian systems with Supybot installed, the complete text 
of the Supybot license can be found in /usr/share/doc/supybot/LICENSE 
 
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Mon 13 Sep 2004, 13:44 
